---
title: Proposal For A Radical Directory
author: Meri
---

### Social media sucks

Grassroots activist groups need media to be effective in what they do. When your
goal is to transform society, you can only get so far working in a bubble. So
most of us use **corporate social media **for our public communications --
Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, etc. At the other end of a spectrum, there is
also **independent media **-- everything from email newsletters and printed
flyers and posters, to community radio stations. Most groups have a formal or
informal media strategy that sits somewhere in between these two points.

Using corporate media will always come with a compromise to our values. But
without collective solutions, it is impossible to resist their constant
monopolisation of our shared knowledge, time and resources. And while the
platforms are fraught, many of us have created pages with large followings and a
rich archive of content. Rather than abandoning these valuable assets, we need
to begin divesting towards alternatives.

Consider how much these platforms are working against us. We need to compete
with sponsored posts, viral videos, holiday pictures and doomsday news articles
for attention, even when the majority of our audiences want to know about
collective action. Since they are designed to maximise the time you spend
engaging (and therefore, how much advertising they can expose you to), social
media feeds are effectively **designed to dissuade you from taking meaningful
action.**

It's not that social media content doesn't inspire anyone to do anything good --
it's that the platform itself generally makes us more passive and therefore
makes social change harder. What if we had a platform that was oriented
completely towards action?

### Social media is indispensible

For leftist, radical and grassroots organisers, there are three main problems
that are solved by social media:

- To be informed about events and changes in the community
- To request support from the community
- To educate and radicalise people in your social network who are not yet
  actively engaged in political struggle, and to be educated yourself

Particularly Facebook, with its Events feature, has become an integral part of
the practice of organising public actions and mobilising communities. It's at
the point where those who opt out of having a Facebook account have to just
accept not hearing about most events.

If you quit Instagram as well, you'll find it's also much harder to publicly ask
for help on projects, and you end up feeling out of the loop on current
discussions. If you want to find out information about a group you've heard of,
many groups don't even have an online presence outside of their social media
pages.

We all know these companies are harmful, but we have made them indispensable to
our movements. Individual boycotts don't work. *We need collective solutions.*

### Proposal for a new platform

Radical Directory is the project of a small team of activists that have been
meeting regularly for over 15 months. Our ultimate goal is to make **corporate
social media redundant for organising. **For us, this means creating a **new
digital platform for independent media **that provides an **alternative for the
three functions listed above, and does it better **than Facebook, Instagram etc.

The idea of making a modern web platform might sound daunting. But media
activists throughout history have adapted to and reappropriated new technologies
such as printing, radio, video and software to be run for and by communities. We
are particularly inspired by **Indymedia**, which used web technology that ran
on open source software created by activists in so-called Australia.

We have similarly really big goals, but we know we need to start small (when it
comes to the software - not the ideas!). To begin with, we want to create an
online **directory of grassroots groups. **Each group will have its own editable
page, and any campaigns run by that group can also have their subpage. We want
to work with organisers to create content for these pages, which could
be** text, images, video or sound**. In order to really help people understand
what you do, we want to support you to tell the story of your work in an
engaging way. We want to ask you about your goals and vision, the impact of your
work, how people can support you, and the groups or projects that you inspired
you to come together.

This directory can become a resource that we can direct people to who are new to
activism and want a deeper insight into the movement ecosystem before jumping in
to joining a group. But we also believe that by articulating and illustrating
the links between all the different ways in which we do political practice, this
will lift us all up, as we can more easily learn from each other and see how far
we have come.

Another easy feature we could add early on is a space for articles, essays or
other resources that groups want to contribute to this repository of collective
knowledge. This might be a legal guide on how to submit an FOI request, how to
open a group bank account for new organisations, or commentary and analysis.

### Future visions

The next big step would be to add **events **to the platform, with all the
important features that Facebook has. But while this is definitely achievable
with support, getting it right so that it's well designed and easy for everyone
to use will be a technical challenge. And if our communities aren't ready or
don't support posting their events on a new platform, there is no point doing
all that work.

So it's important to start with the directory so that this project can start to
reach a wider audience first. This will also give us time to really hone our
skills and develop our internal structure. We need to feel confident in our
collective capacity to be democratic and accountable before we ask people to
rely on us.

We believe there is so much power in approaching **a platform with collectives
at the centre, **rather than individuals. Instagram and Facebook are structured
to be all about individuals and the companies that sell to them. When grassroots
activists post on their group pages, it's hard to piece those different posts
together to see the greater narratives -- about systemic violence and
oppression, about communities coming together, about campaigns that are fought,
and the reasons they might have succeeded or failed.

Instead, the data (posts, events, images, discussions) that make up our
collective history are essentially just washed into the archive, to be accessed
only as isolated bites of content. On the internet, media and archives go
together. The past can easily be interlinked with the present. So much
interconnection is possible. We could be bringing so many new people into our
movements, truly building grassroots leftist power. What's stopping us?

### It's up to you

There are so many things that can go wrong with a project like this. While media
is not in itself a pressing topic for most people, our ability to communicate
with the world is something that everybody is invested in, so the stakes can
feel really high. Again, there is no chance for this project to make a
meaningful impact without widespread support from activists and organisers. If
you have **feedback, **concerns or things you want to
discuss, [**join our Discord server**](https://discord.gg/fRURFnac4H)and
introduce yourself. Alternatively you can contact us at
radicaldirectory@protonmail.com

If you have capacity to **become part of our organising team** or want
to **contribute specialised skills, **please let us know when you join the
Discord. You don't need special skills to contribute in a meaningful way, and we
are always happy to skillshare. Together, everyday humans can do enormous
things.

Radical independent media has only ever worked when it's been powered by the
community. We believe that in order to continue building power, to learn from
the past, and to ultimately win our struggles against oppressive forces, we need
independent media that harnesses the power of current web tech to make our
public communications more direct, more accessible, and more oriented towards
collective action.

For more info check out our [FAQ](https://radical.directory/post/faq)
