---
title: Surveillance
author: Tori
---

Transparency is an antidote to the fear caused by uncertainty.

When we don't know how police are surveilling us, only that they are, and with
vast resources behind them, we allow their culture of stealth and superiority to
settle over our daily lives.

At the end of the day, we are all just humans logging on to servers, and
patterns of police behaviour can be traced as well as our own. With this
knowledge under our belt we can push back against the fog of anxiety and
disempowerment, knowing exactly how and on which platforms our identities are
being documented.

Adapting to the presence of state eyes is not new. It is the compromise we
choose to make in order to connect with the world around us. The vast majority
of people are used to making these ostensibly coercive decisions, very few
having the real freedom to choose whether or not they engage with popular
culture, communication tools included.

It has become clear over the past few years that we are still infants of this
era, with even Mark Zuckerberg stumbling at the prospect of navigating the nexus
of panopticon-savvy democratic policy, the money hungry giants of the data
mining industry, and the digital illiteracy of generations of people who quite
understandably cannot yet grasp that logging on to Facebook is like clocking in
to a 24/7 consumer survey-cum-police interview.

So, the question therefore remains: how exactly do the police use social media
against people?

I say against specifically because we must remember always that the boys in
blue, no matter what they tell us, are an organisation designed to defend the
interests of capital and the proponents of colonialism and white supremacy.
Regardless of rhetoric they will always seek to maintain their use of force,
whether physical, psychological, social or institutional. Until they turn
against the powers that employ them, the police will never be working 'for' the
people.

What follows is an exploration in demystifying how the police employ
surveillance techniques on social media. This, like everything, will be a
constantly growing document.

### **Clearview AI**

The Australian Federal Police, Victoria Police, South Australia Police and
Queensland Police Service all currently have contracts with Clearview AI, a US
based tech company founded by Australian entrepreneur Hoan Ton-That.

While there are many household names in the field of facial recognition, such as
Google's FaceNet or Amazon's Rekognition, Clearview set a new precedent with
their practice of 'web-scraping'. Like the verb implies, the company extracts
images, some several billion thus far, from publicly available platforms like
Facebook and Youtube which they then run through
programs ["to make a biometric template for each face and match those templates to the online sources of the images."](https://theconversation.com/australian-police-are-using-the-clearview-ai-facial-recognition-system-with-no-accountability-132667)

This means that in practice, an image can be uploaded into the application, and
then cross referenced with a Facebook-sized database of faces, to then return
results of any matches and the information associated with these matching
photos, like the name and details of the Facebook user that this photo 'belongs'
to.

Source:https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/jun/19/victoria-police-distances-itself-from-controversial-facial-recognition-firm-clearview-ai

The role that facial recognition software plays in reproducing the racism
already entrenched in police practice is
well [documented](https://www.aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/how-is-face-recognition-surveillance-technology-racist/).
The current wave of Black resistance has catalysed the long petitioned
withdrawal of Amazon, Google and IBM's facial recognition software from police
organisations across the US.

The track record of facial recognition software returning shocking inaccuracy in
correctly matching white faces compared to non-white faces and male faces
compared to female faces compounds with the overrepresentation of BIPOC people
in police databases due to racial profiling, with the end result that there have
been recurring cases of people of colour, particularly Black and brown people,
being misidentified through facial recognition
and [wrongfully arrested](https://www.theverge.com/2020/6/24/21301759/facial-recognition-detroit-police-wrongful-arrest-robert-williams-artificial-intelligence) and
charged.

Despite all this, Ton-That maintains that he is contributing to making the world
a safer place, and half of this colony's police forces are liberally using this
software to sift through surveillance footage and video content published
publicly online, extracting images and finding potential matches to charge.

### **Facebook's Law Enforcement Portal: How Social Media is Used to Arrest**

Go to  https://www.facebook.com/records/login/

Welcome to Facebook's Law Enforcement Portal (FLEP).

Since its growth to hegemonic levels of popularity worldwide, the police have
turned to Facebook as a space to draw information and evidence from, through the
use of warrant and subpoena. The logic flows; Facebook is a business place in
which citizens of a state have conversations, collect information and organise
events. If any of the aforementioned activities is potentially incriminating,
then it is the equivalent of the police requesting a copy of a venue's CCTV.

The subpoena previously took the shape of
a [form](https://info.publicintelligence.net/Facebook2010.pdf), but has since
been streamlined into the Portal, for ease of use. Since 2016, Facebook has
received 125,800 Legal Process Requests and 15,000 Emergency Requests. While a
Legal Process Request requires the relevant police organisation to present a
warrant, Emergency requests do not. Facebook defines an emergency as situations
where the
matter ["involves imminent risk of physical injury or death"](https://transparency.facebook.com/government-data-requests).

### **Social Network Analysis**

Social Network Analysis, SNA, is not to be confused with *social media
analysis*. SNA is a data collation method used in fields from consumer-choice
analysis to disease control. In the context of the police, it is used to build
maps of social relations through data collected through prior arrests and
associated information.

Police use SNA programs to build relationship maps, assisting where detectives
otherwise use their 'skills', intuition and cognitive
bias. [SNA works](https://www.policechiefmagazine.org/power-social-network-analysis/) by
data being entered as nodes (i.e. people, organisations) and edges (the
relationship that links them). The use of this process creates maps called
'sociograms' that allow police to notice hidden or subtle connections and make
arrests, pre-emptive or otherwise.

While the use of SNA in policing does not automatically include the use of
social media analysis, the power of these two instruments combining is explicit.
Most explanations of when police use SNA are the big three, namely drug crime,
gang violence and terrorism. However the scope of what is
being [defined as terrorism](https://www.redblacknotes.com/2020/08/20/facebook-announce-crackdown-against-anarchists/) by
different states has long been inching into territory of broad traditions of
civil disobedience.

Terrorism withstanding, the overshadowing perception of who is criminalised in
the drug trade and who is included in analysis of gang violence themselves stand
as deeply politicised institutions upholding certain forms of capitalism (that
themselves uphold colonial white supremacy) while others are demonised and
categorised as prison labour.

Understanding how social media is used in the context of SNA is therefore also a
question of understanding how racial capitalism is enforced in the age of social
media.

Source: [https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2300/RR2301/RAND_RR2301](https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2300/RR2301/RAND_RR2301.pdf) [(White supremacy overshadowing domestic terrorism in the US)](https://www.csis.org/analysis/escalating-terrorism-problem-united-states)
